---
title: How I Redesigned My Laravel Blog Again
categories: Laravel,Design
summary: Every few years I feel the pressure to redesign my blog. Design trends change fast and so does my personal taste. Once I don't like my site anymore, I know I cannot let go. I need to work on a new redesign. This article is about the latest redesign of my Laravel blog.
preview_image: 
preview_image_twitter:
hidden: false
---

In 2018, I [moved my blog from Jekyll to Laravel](https://christoph-rumpel.com/2018/1/how-i-redesigned-my-blog-and-moved-it-from-jekyll-to-laravel) and I took the opportunity to redesign it as well. The site was based on [Sebastian De Deyne's blog](https://sebastiandedeyne.com/) which was a Laravel application working with markdown files for posts.

For this redesign in 2020, I wanted to keep working with Laravel and markdown files, but I wanted to build everything myself to see what that is like. So here were my goald for the redesign:

* Build the "core" (working with markdown files) myself
* Implement a fresh design
* Try new technologies (Livewire, Alpins.j, Mailcoach)

## Build The Core

I really enjoy working with markdown files. They are easy to create and edit, and it feels good writing my articles this way. As a result, I don't need to store my articles in a database.

This is how my .md files are structure:

```markdown
---
title: How I Redesigned My Laravel Blog Again
categories: Laravel,Design
summary: Every few years I feel the pressure to redesign my blog. Design trends change fast and so does my personal taste. Once I don't like my site anymore, I know I cannot let go. I need to work on a new redesign. This article is about the latest redesign of my Laravel blog.
preview_image: 
preview_image_twitter:
hidden: false
---

In 2018, I [moved my blog from Jekyll to Laravel](https://christoph-rumpel.com/2018/1/how-i-redesigned-my-blog-and-moved-it-from-jekyll-to-laravel) and I took the opportunity to redesign it as well. The site was based on [Sebastian De Deyne's blog](https://sebastiandedeyne.com/) which was a Laravel application working with markdown files for posts.

...
```

At the top you have some meta information about the article like the title, category tags, etc. After that there is the typical markdown content which is the post itself.

In order to convert such files to blog posts, there are a few steps included:

* Load meta info (YamlFrontMatter)
* Get date from file name
* Convert markdown file to HTML (PHP League Commonmark)
* Store all info in object
* Output through blade template

The goal is to create a kind of `post model` that you can work with. From that point, everything is similar to an approach where your posts are stored in a database. 


## Implement Fresh Design

As always, design is the most challenging part of every redesign for me. I mostly know what I want, but it is just so hard to get it there. Just to make that clear, I'm by far no designer at all. I think I have a good understanding of it, but that's it.

When I redesign my blog I don't want to work with a designer to make it happen. `I always aim for a simple and clean design` I can create myself.

<div class="blognote"><strong>Note:</strong> Now that I wrote that sentence, I noticed that this is the same I aim for when writing code.</div>

Because my design skills are limited, I look for sites I like, and I try to copy some of their ideas. Still, the goal is always to create something new, just with borrowed inspiration.

This time I reached out to Jack McDade to aks for some advice on problems I had with the home page. Some days later he published [this amazing video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=snzLxoBKAo0) where he provides feedback on my mentioned problems. You gotta love this guy!

The following screenshots show a little bit of the site's design progress.

## Try New Technologies

### Livewire

I was a bit late to the [Livewire](https://laravel-livewire.com/) party, but with the new blog I wanted to give it a first try. So implemented a little search for my posts. It is crazy how `ridiculous easy` it was to get a first prototype working without writing any lines of JavaScript.

### Alpine.js

Still, I needed a little of JavaScript for some details of the search like showing and hiding the form. So I also gave Alpine.js a first try.

It takes a little time to get used to the [strange](https://github.com/christophrumpel/christoph-rumpel.com/blob/production/resources/views/livewire/postList.blade.php#L6) syntax where you put your JavaScript code inside your markup. But I liked the simplicity of adding the wanted behaviour.

### Mailcoach

Mailcoach is a self-hosted newsletter application by Spatie. I bought a license when it was released last year but couldn't give it a try then. A blgo redesign is always a perfect excuse to try something new.


Challenges
- markdown files
- caching


Design

- inspiration
- help from Jack https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=snzLxoBKAo0
- still adapting
- lots of screenshots




