---
title: My External Display Turns Black When The Lid Of My MacBook Is Closed
categories: Mac
summary: "For years now, I've been using my MacBook with the lid closed. That's my preferred setup, where I only focus on one external display. Two months ago, my external display stopped working when I closed the lid of my MacBook. Here is how I solved this issue."
hidden: false
preview_image:
preview_image_twitter:
---

It turns out I'm not the only one facing this or a similar issue. That's why I want to share everything I know about this one with you.

## The Issue

Usually, If you close the lid of your MacBook, your connected, external display becomes the main display. Therefore, if you face the mentioned issue, `the external display will turn black` the moment you close the lid of your MacBook.

For me, this problem came out of nowhere, and I can't remember loading any OS updates or seeing any errors. However, you can read about others facing the same situation or a similar one on different online forums.

## Things To Check

So before I tell you about what helped me, here are a few things for you to check first:

* Are you running the latest version of macOS? If you do not, update your system.
* Is the display directly connected to your MacBook? If not, try it.
* Try to connect the display to a different port on your MacBook.
* Do you have a different external display that you can try as well? If yes, try that.
* Do you have a different MacBook that you can try with your display? If yes, try that.
* Start your Mac in Safe-Mode and check if the issue remains
* Start your Mac in Recovery-Mode and check if the issue remains. The list showing the recovery options is enough; you don't have to load any backups.

## What Fixed It For Me

I can only speak for my case, but I could fix it after spending over an hour with Apple Support.
In Safe-Mode, my display was still not working. But in Recovery-Mode (the list showing the recovery options), the display suddenly worked. `This was finally a good sign.`

<div class="blognote"><strong>Note:</strong> Please be aware that I only share what helped me. There is no guarantee it will work for you, and you are responsible if you break something.</div>

Apple Support then told me to:

* Unplug my external display
* Delete `/Library/Preferences/com.apple.windowserver.plist`
* Delete `~/Library/Preferences/ByHost/com.apple.windowserver.XXXXX.plist`
* Restart

After that, my external display was finally working again, even with the lid of my MacBook closed.

## Context

From what I learned, those two files are responsible for window management on your machine. Somehow, there must have been an error, and that is why I was facing the issue. When you delete those files, your Mac will create them from scratch after a reboot. That's what solved the case for me. Hooray!
