---
title: Live Coding Tips
categories: tips,coding
summary: "Let's be honest. Live coding is terrifying! Everyone is watching every character you type, and they are waiting for you to fail. At least it feels like that. Today I want to share some tips I have collected over the last years while live coding at conferences or live streaming."
hidden: true
preview_image: images/blog/2021/streaming_setup.png
preview_image_twitter: images/blog/2021/streaming_setup.png
---


## Preparation
### #1 Practice, Practice, Practice

Practice is everything. You have to know your examples in and out. This is the only way you will be relaxed enough to present and talk. The more you practice, the more you will run into errors, which is much better than during your talk or presentation.

### #2 Notes

While live coding, you don't have notes as you have with presentation tools like Keynote. Still, you need some help to stay on track and structure your session. It doesn't matter if you have post-its, an iPad, or Word open on another screen. Just make sure you have notes somewhere that guide you to guide the viewer through your coding. It's already enough to take in for a viewer watching you code; everything else should already be clear. Talk about what you did and what you want to do next.

I like to have my notes on my iPad. This way, the viewer never sees an opened application for notes on the same machine.

### #3 Version Control

Depending on how long your coding examples are, it makes sense to store different states in version control through branches. First, this will make practicing specific parts easier. And second, if something goes wrong during your talk, you can still switch to a further state.
Later you can also share this repository with the viewers, and it will be easier for them to look through different examples.

### #4 Backups

At some point, things will go wrong. It is just a matter of time, so you better be prepared for it. I always have backups for my talks. First, I export my slides to a PDF and share that with the conference/meetup. Then, if something goes wrong with my machine, you can still present it from a PDF. But what about live coding? There is only one solution: pre-record your talk. I always have a video of my talk pre-recorded. This way, I will show the video and speak to it if something is not working anymore and I cannot fix it.
I never had to use it, but there will be one day, and I like to be prepared.

## Visual
### #5 Presentation Assistant

When you are live coding, it often is hard to follow your shortcuts. Different assistants can help by showing shortcuts you use. PhpStorm has a built-in plugin called `Presentation assistant.` It shows every shortcut I am using. Be aware that this plugin can show different combinations like the default ones or the ones you use.

If your session gets recorded, users can also check shortcuts afterward, which is pretty nice.


### #6 Resolution & Sizes

Size is a big problem for live coding. If you can read your screen well, it does not mean everyone else can do it. Maybe they have other apps open while they watch you, or they sit further away than you. That's why you have to make sure everything is big enough during live coding. The easiest solution is to change your resolution. This way, everything you show on that screen will be big enough. If you only change the editor font size, a browser window will be too small when switching to it. I present at 1280x720 (2x). It looks quite big for you while presenting, but it will be good to read for everyone else, which is more important.

Besides that, you can also change only the font sizes of the tools you show. This works too, but be aware that menus or icons might be too small next to the font you are changing.

### #7 clean up

Because of the resolution, space is already an issue. Everything you don't need, remove it or hide it. It lets the viewer concentrate on the essential parts of your presentation. For me, this means:

* Use apps in full-screen so you don't see the OS menu.
* Close apps you don't use. If the viewer sees an attractive icon they don't know, you already lost their attention.
* Use a clean theme.
* Close the console after using it.

### #8 Mix Code With Slides

Depending on the length of your session, provide contrast to your code, like mixing your examples with slides. This gives the viewer a break from code, and you can show important information on slides.

## During
### #9 Talking And Coding Is Hard

Talking and coding at the same time is hard. If you are not used to it, it will take some time. So, for a beginning, write code in between talking. Say what you are up to, write the lines, explain it. This approach will be more straightforward when you just started.

Like with so many other things, time and experience will help you. You will get better with every session.

### #10 Failing 101

Like already mentioned, things will fail at some point. It is just about how you react and how well you are prepared.
Here is my 101 for unplanned situations:
* take a second and breathe and concentrate
* read out loud the error you see or explain what is not working as expected
* We are all used to solving bugs, but while presenting, you have to express your thoughts to the viewers
* explain what you see, what your thoughts are, and what could solve the situation
* don't be afraid to ask for help too (host, audience)
* spending some time on finding a bug is ok, but if it takes too long, think about a different option (next version control state, backup video, or slides)

## General
### 11 Learn From Others

As always, you can learn a lot by just watching other developers. Here are a few who are good at live coding for you to check out:

* Marcel Pociot [Package Development 101](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6H99m5KgG88)
* Adam Wathan [Tailwind CSS Best Practice Patterns](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J_7_mnFSLDg)
* Caleb Porzio [Say No To Complexity With AlpineJS ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4c8dpZN0rqM)

### 12 You Can Code

One thing to always remember is, that you already know how to code. You don't have to learn something completely knew. You have to get used to a new environment. You can do that!

