---
title: 3 Compelling Reasons For Developers To Write Tests
categories: Testing, Laravel
summary: "There are many reasons why you should write tests, but these three are the most important ones for me today."
hidden: false
preview_image: images/blog/2023/why_write_test.png
preview_image_twitter: images/blog/2023/why_write_test.png
---

When you start thinking about writing tests for your applications, `HOW` to do that is what you are mainly looking for. Fair enough, you need to learn available tools and techniques. I've written an article about on [everything that you can test in a Laravel application](https://christoph-rumpel.com/2023/3/everything-you-can-test-in-your-laravel-application).

But before you start writing tests, you should know `WHY` you are doing it. Understanding the reasons behind it will help you to get started and keep you motivated.

This is what I want to talk about in this article. I will give you my reasons why I write tests and why I think you should do that too.

## Confidence

The main reason why I started writing tests is to gain confidence, not in myself, but in my code. It sounds stupid, but I do `sleep better at night having tested code`. I'm not writing code just for myself. There will always be end-users or clients interacting with what I have built, which should work.

Having tests make me feel good about my work, and I can let it out into the wild without worrying too much. I know I have done my best to make it work and can still fix it if something goes wrong.

## Maintainability

By writing tests, you are already `investing in the future of your application`. Covering your code with tests is extra work today, but it will pay off later 100 times. You will be able to:

* refactor your code
* add new features
* update your dependencies

And all that without worrying about breaking things. `Your tests will tell you if you did something wrong.`

Sometimes I return to an app after only a few weeks, and I have trouble understanding my own code. But then I saw the tests and knew what I was thinking. I can see what the code is supposed to do and how it is supposed to work. This is a massive benefit when having tests.

But this is not about you or your future self but also your team or clients. A tested application is an application other developers can quickly join or overtake. This is worth a lot, trust me!

## Time

I know writing tests takes a lot of time, especially at the beginning. That's why many developers do not write them. They have a strict deadline and need to get things done. I've been there too. But this is a short-term view. If you are working on a project for a longer period, you will see that you will even save time by writing tests.

This is also something that you can tell your boss or team lead. Writing tests will `save you money` in the long run; a lot of money. Again, writing tests is an investment in the future of the application. It shows that you are serious about this project.

## Conclusion

It is not easy to get into testing, and it might take some time to get used to it. What helped me was learning `why` I write them and how I benefit from doing so. Today, I couldn't work without them anymore.

If you want to learn more about testing, I do have a few resources of mine for you:

* [Everything You Can Test In A Laravel Application](https://christoph-rumpel.com/2023/3/everything-you-can-test-in-your-laravel-application) (article)
* [Getting Started With TDD in PHP](https://learn.christoph-rumpel.com/products/getting-started-with-tdd-in-php) (free mini course)
* [PEST Driven Laravel](https://learn.christoph-rumpel.com/products/pest-driven-laravel) (paid course)
